Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're
going to start in the direction of calculus
with interval poly numbers we're going to
introduce the idea of composition of poly
numbers which is an interesting operation
that we can do with them and then a rather
special case of composition called translation
although we don't have any pictures associated
to poly numbers yet it will turn out that these
operations of translation do correspond to an
intuitive understanding of moving things left or
right then we're going to examine translation in
a somewhat general way and that will naturally
lead us to the notion of a derivative and not
just a derivative but also higher analogues of
the derivative which we're going to call sub
derivatives these are subtly different from the
higher derivatives that are usually introduced
in calculus so just the beginnings of calculus
here in a very simple algebraic context of poly
numbers in fact just integral poly numbers for
now ok so let's start talking about composition
of poly numbers and let's illustrate things with
this particular Pauline umber p equals 1 3 4 and
in standard alpha form that's the poly number 1
plus 3 alpha plus 4 alpha squared when I remind
you that we can evaluate P at a number C by
defining P of C to be what you get when you
replace the alphas with C's so 1 plus 3 C plus
4 C squared and since only elementary arithmetic
is being used here we can replace C with Eddy
say integer to get an integral value for P of
C so for example if C is equal to 1 then the
right-hand side here becomes 1 plus 3 plus 4
which is 8 or if C was equal to 2 then we need
to have 1 plus 6 plus 16 which is 23 so P of 2
is 23 or integral value is also allowed for
example minus 1 then we would get 1 minus 3
plus 4 which is 2 and so on so today we're going
to extend this idea by considering substituting
not number of values for C but rather other poly
numbers instead of saying so for example suppose
that we have Q now poly number 2 plus alpha
then we could define P of Q which is just this
kind of expression here but with the C replaced
everywhere with Q 1 plus 3q plus 4 Q squared and
explicitly there's 1 plus 3 there's the Q plus 4
Q squared and then we could just expand this out
using our arithmetic for poly numbers and get
23 plus 19 alpha plus 4 alpha squared and this
new Pauline umber is the composition of P and
Q it involves both P and Q sort of Q inside P
before I move to the next slide I'll just point
out that the point of view that we're taking today
in this lecture also is very much in line with
this video in the wild Lyn alg series wild and
alg 20 which is a video on basis of polynomial
spaces so if you'd like to get a little bit of
another point of view on this topic with
very similar kind of notation then have a
look at that video all right so we've defined
composition of two Pauline umbers so somewhat
more formally what we have defined amounts to
this that if P and Q are integral poly numbers
and if P has this particular form in standard
alpha form so a 0 plus a 1 alpha plus all the
way up to a and alpha to the n then what P of
Q is is by definition a 0 plus a 1 Q plus a
2 Q squared and so on all the way up to a n Q to
the N we replace each of the powers of alpha here
by the corresponding powers of Q q is a poly
number so the powers of Q are just obtained
by multiplying cube by itself as many times as
required alright a little exercise show that
in general P of Q is not equal to Q of P if you
take two random poly numbers P and Q then most
likely P of Q is not equal to Q of P so just
make at least one calculation that shows that
but there are some interesting examples where P
of Q does equal Q of P and a very simple example
is this one here so suppose we define P sub n
to be the kind of pure power alpha to the N so
in terms of our original notation that would be a
poly number which has a whole bunch of zeros and
then a 1 in the nth coefficient so if we define
P of n that way then show that P sub n of P sub
M he is the same thing as piece of M of P sub n
and both of those are equal to P sub n times M
another thing to observe is that if the degree of
P is n in the general situation and the degree of
Q is M let us say then the degree of the
composition P of Q or the degree of the
composition Q of P they're both equal to n times m
and to illustrate that and so to suggest why it's
true let's have a look at an example so suppose P
is 1 minus 2 alpha plus alpha cubed say of degree
3 suppose that Q is equal to 3 minus alpha plus
2 alpha squared of degree 2 then P of Q would
be so there is P we're going to replace each
of the alphas with a Q so 1 minus 2 there is
Q plus here there is Q all cubed now to expand
all of that would be a little bit of work but
to figure out what its degree is is not too hard
we're just looking at what's the highest power of
alpha that will appear when we expand it all out
and the highest power of alpha will appear right
here when we take that alpha square term and
end up cubing it that'll have degree 6 on the
other hand if we look at Q of P means we take the
polynomial Q there it is there and substitute P
for alpha so 3 - there's Q there is P plus 2 times
there's P Paul squared and if we want to know what
the degree of that was well we would look for the
highest power of alpha after we expand just could
be alpha cubes here and here there's gonna be
an alpha cubed all squared so there will be it
now 4 to the 6 when we expand that out that'll be
of degree 6 also so that's just illustrating give
you an idea why this statement is true so that's
general composition but today we're going to be
looking at a rather special case of composition
so there simple kind of composition so the kind
of simple composition that we look at today is
called translation and that's what we get when we
replace the Alpha in a poly number with the very
simple poly number C plus alpha for some integer
C so if we take our poly number P equals one plus
three alpha plus 4 alpha squared then for example
P of 1 plus alpha so the case when C happens to be
equal to 1 well you just replace alpha with alpha
plus 1 or 1 plus alpha alpha squared replaced
with 1 plus alpha all squared and then we expand
this out let's just do it once so the constant
term here the 8 appears because you get a 1 here
a 3 here and a 4 times 1 there for a total of 8
the coefficient of alpha is 11 because we get 3
alphas from here when we expand this out we get
4 times 2 alpha so 3 plus the 8 gives us 11 and
the alpha squared has a coefficient of 4 because
that's only coming from here when we square that
we get an alpha squared times that 4 so similarly
I'll leave you to check that if you replace alpha
with 2 plus alpha in other words you get that
expression there then you get the poly number 23
plus 19 alpha plus 4 alpha squared or if we look
at P of 3 plus alpha we would get 46 plus 27 alpha
plus 4 alpha squared the C can be any integer so
it could also be a negative number for example
minus 1 and P of minus 1 plus alpha well just it
has minus 1 plus alpha again expand it all out now
2 minus 5 alpha plus 4 alpha squared and of course
the numbers don't have to be small ones we could
have P of 37 plus alpha for example then we would
have 37 plus alpha here and here when expand all
that it's a bit of arithmetic we get 5 5 8 8 plus
2 9 9 alpha plus still 4 alpha squared of course
we do hundreds of different examples like this
these are all called translates of alpha because
we're replacing alpha with a simplest kind of
thing essentially which is not really a constant
or an alpha itself which is just alpha plus a
number well we like to have sort of official
definitions for things and also some notation
too so this is an important enough idea that
we're going to introduce some special notation
for it so our official definition is that if P
is an integral poly number and C is an integer
then the left translate of P by C is denoted
by this capital L standing for left sub C that's
the amount that we're translating by of P that's
the actual politic number that we're translating
and that's by definition P of C plus alpha well
say that's left translation of P by C note that
there's only plus signs here so that in particular
this is also defined if we had started with P
a natural poly number no it's all coefficients
natural numbers and C itself was a natural number
then all the expressions involving here would just
have natural number of coefficients so the sum the
translate would also be a natural pond number so
we could have done that we could have started by
defining translation for natural poly numbers and
then extended it to integral poly numbers but
I'm just treating the integral poly number as
the main case here all right so here's how the
notation works here's P again if P is that then
L sub 1 of P is P of 1 plus alpha we've already
computed that looks like that and L sub 3 of P is
P of 3 plus alpha 46 plus 27 alpha plus 4 alpha
squared so in a few videos from now we will be
introducing pictures associated to Polly numbers
but at this stage the pictures are unnecessary
we're defining the left translate of a poly number
purely algebraically here is an easy and pleasant
little theorem that tells us what happens if we
translate a poly number twice first by C and then
by say D so if P is an integral part number and
CD are integers then so what does this would mean
this is L sub D of L sub C of P so it means that
to evaluate this we start with P we apply L sub C
to P in other words we translate P by C and then
once we've got that we translate that whole thing
by D and the claim is that doing that is the same
thing as translating P by C plus D all in one go
alright so the proof is not hard let's have a look
at it the left-hand side L sub D evaluated at L
sub C of P so we replace the L sub C of P with
what it's equal to which is P of C plus alpha
that's what L sub C of P is and then we have
to take L sub D of that we have to translate
that by D well that's going to be a poly number in
auf or you can write it out as a bunch of alphas
and when we translate it by D it means we replace
each of the alphas by D plus alpha so we can just
as well do it right here we can just replace that
alpha with D plus alpha so it's P of C plus D plus
alpha but the associative property holds these is
an integer that's an integer that's our simplest
poly number C plus D plus F is the same as C plus
D plus alpha and when we read it like that then
we can see that that's just the translate of
P by C plus D so that's the end of the proof
and as an easy consequence of that we see that
if we translate by C and then translate by D
it's the same as if we first translate by D and
then translate by C because in both cases we're
getting the translate by C plus D or by D plus C
but since C plus D is equal to D [__] they're
the same alright so here's an interesting idea we
have the idea of translating a poly number by an
integer C perhaps by one or by two or by 37 the
idea is to think about how this translate depends
actually on C so it means that we're going to
translate P but not by a fixed amount but by
sort of general integer C we're going to just
substitute C plus alpha 4 Alpha where the C is
just the letter C representing some integer in our
mind which isn't fixed so that would be 1 plus 3
C plus alpha plus 4 c plus alpha squared and then
if we expanded this out just treating this C like
an unknown number for now we would get 1 plus 3
C plus 3 alpha and then when we Square this will
have C squared so we'll be 4 C squared there will
be 2 the alpha times 4 is 8 C alpha plus 4 alpha
squared now we want to think about that as a
poly number so as a combination of powers of
alpha so we'll separate it into the things that
don't involve any alphas which is this term this
term and this term 1 plus 3 C + 4 C squared plus
the things involving just a power of alpha so the
three alpha and the eight C alpha can write like
this 3 plus 8 C times alpha and then the only
thing involving a higher power of alpha is the
4 alpha squared term so now it's a poly number
there's some integer there's another integer
times alpha plus another integer times alpha
squared so we observe that the three coefficients
that we're getting here are themselves polynomials
in C whatever that kind of means they're like
poly numbers or like polynomials except that
instead of having alpha or beta there's a variable
C floating around not quite sure what that means
we observe that the degrees of these things
are decreasing this is a degree 2 in C this
is a degree 1 and C this is du degree 0 and C and
also important to observe that this first one or
the 0th coefficient here is just P of C it's just
the original polynomial with alpha replaced with
C well that's not too surprising because if you
look at this equation this is P of C plus alpha
here it is here if we set alpha equal to 0 in both
sides then on this side we would have P of C and
on this side these two terms would disappear
we would just get this so this has to be P
of C nevertheless it's important to observe that
thing is the original polynomial we started with
evaluated at C but where do these things come from
could we have predicted what those coefficients
are and what are we really doing here it's not
entirely clear because we're starting to treat
C as some kind of variable we said we would try
to be careful about not doing that kind of thing
well fortunately we have a framework that allows
us to say exactly what we've been doing here it's
the framework of by Pauli numbers so what we did
on that previous slide is clarified by recasting
it using by Polly numbers and I remind you that
we've talked about by Polly numbers they are
generalizations or extensions of Pauli numbers
where we don't just have things going down in
columns or we don't just have things going along
rows but we have a rectangular array involving
both columns and rows so for example this is
an unrelated example of a by Polly number it's
called Q it's written in this rectangular kind of
array and we think of that as being a combination
of alphas so representing the rows and betas
representing the columns with increasing powers
of alpha going down and increasing powers of beta
going across so this can be re-written as 1 plus 0
beta minus 2 beta squared and then plus 3 alpha
plus 4 alpha beta plus 0 alpha beta squared and
the Alpha and the beta in this context are very
particular kinds of well in this case by poly
numbers so alpha is 0-1 and beta is 0-1 this one
being along a row not being along at all okay so
that's what a buy poly number is just a quick
review and now what we're going to do is going
to go back to that computation and instead of
using a variable C we're going to just do buy
poly number arithmetic we're going to replace
the C with beta let's go right here so we're
going consider the left translate of P by beta by
definition that is P of beta plus alpha well beta
plus alpha it's the same as alpha plus beta so we
could also write it like this if we wanted to and
that's what we get when we take P which I remind
you was 1 2 plus 3 alpha plus 4 alpha squared and
we replace the alpha with beta plus alpha so
there's 1 plus 3 beta plus alpha plus 4 beta
plus alpha all squared and now we can expand that
out and we can collect terms involving the alpha
the Alpha squared and the things that don't have
any alphas in them we get the same thing that we
did before except there's betas now instead of C's
so we have 1 plus 3 beta plus 4 beta squared plus
3 plus 8 beta times alpha plus 4 alpha squared
but now we want to interpret this this is a bi
poly number so it means that it can be written
as an array so in other words this is exactly
1 3 4 because those correspond to the powers of
beta increasing with no alphas and then this 3
plus 8 beta times alpha there's 3 alpha there and
the 8 alpha beta is that term there plus 4 alpha
squared is that thing there now we agree not
to put zeros here if we don't feel like it now
such a bi poly number is very pleasant because
prominently it's symmetric the rows and columns
are appearing symmetrically here so we could
rewrite it if we wanted to by writing it first in
terms of this column this column would be 1 plus
3 alpha plus 4 alpha squared and then this column
would be 3 plus 8 alpha all times beta and this
column here plus 4 beta weird so this expression
and this expression are exactly the same except
the alphas and the beta's have been interchanged
and the symmetry of this situation is not at all
a surprise it's obvious because we were evaluating
something in the form P of beta plus alpha or P of
alpha plus beta so the Alpha and the beta here are
appearing symmetrically so of course we're going
to get something that's symmetrical this symmetry
is a very important aspect of things so notice
that the original Pauline umber that we started
with P here is it is in sort of its original form
1 plus 3 alpha plus 4 alpha squared written as a
column that's appearing right there that's the
first column and then there's sort of this other
column and then there's this next column and there
it's not entirely clear how we get them starting
from this because this is what we started with but
it's very interesting operation to start with this
poly number and end up producing this this little
table so ray this by poly number to get a better
sense of what's going on let's have a look at a
slightly bigger example here's another integral
poly number Q minus 4 plus 7 alpha plus 10 alpha
squared minus 6 alpha cubed plus 2 alpha to the
fourth well translated by beta so that means
evaluating Q at the combination beta plus alpha
so there we have beta plus alpha substituted for
all the alphas there now we have to expand this
out which is a pleasant task because it's just
the binomial theorem applied several times there's
minus 4 plus 7 beta plus alpha 10 we're expanding
beta plus alpha squared here minus 6 expanding
beta plus alpha cube they're plus 2 there's beta
plus alpha to the fourth so I hope you recognize
the binomial theorem there you can have a look
at the earlier lecture on the binomial theorem
if that's unfamiliar the coefficients here are the
binomial coefficients formed by Pascal's triangle
or Pascal's array okay so our job is to expand
this out and collect terms so the first thing
we'll do is we'll collect all the terms that
don't involve any alphas this minus 4/7 beta
10 beta squared minus 6 beta cubed + 2 beta to
the fourth there they all are and then the terms
involving a single alpha the seven alpha here the
10 times 2 beta 20 beta there is a 3 beta squared
times minus 6 and over here 4 beta cubed times
2 so not reading across here the terms involving
alpha squared because now 4 squared there times
10 an alpha squared there times minus 18 beta and
alpha squared there times 12 beta squared there's
also an alpha cubed which appears right there the
coefficient of minus 6 and also right there with
the coefficient of 8 beta and last but not least
there's an alpha to the fourth times 2 so there's
the full expression and now we can associate to
that the by poly number it is a bipolar number
and here is its array it's just the coefficients
where we've dispensed with the alphas and betas so
minus 4 7 10 minus 6 to cross that first row then
720 minus 18 8 then 10 minus 18 12 - 6 8 + 2 and
if we want to know the alphas and betas associated
to any term it's just a question of reading down
the rows and columns so this one here for example
is associated to alpha alpha squared alpha cube
to the the cubed associated to that and going
across the beta's one beta so altogether alpha
cubed times beta associated to that okay so this
by Polly number we're going to call it t of Q
it only depends on our starting poly number and
maybe we'll give it a name we might call it the
Taylor polynomial number associated to the poly
number Q and notice again very important that
it's symmetrical the rows and the columns are
symmetrically placed also notice that the original
Pauline umber Q is right there along that first
column so let's have another look at this Taylor
Pauline umber there it is there again I've just
rewritten it and now I'm going to write it out
again but reading essentially down the columns
first so there's the original Pauline number
Q and there's the next column times beta next
column the beta squared next column with a beta
cubed and I made it to the fourth when we look at
the Taylor polynomial this way we observe that
the coefficients are starting with Q and then
the other ones following are dependent on Q in a
certain way and this relationship between Q and
these successive coefficients here in this Taylor
polynomial for mathematics so this first one that
appears is called the derivative of the original
Q so there is Q and there is the derivative and
those of you who have done some calculus will
recognize that it really is the derivative if
you take the derivative of this the minus four is
killed derivative of this is seven the derivative
of this is twenty alpha derivative here is minus
18 alpha squared the derivative of this is 8 alpha
cubed but the point is that we can define the
derivative dissuade we can say that if we start
with the polynomial Q or a poly number Q then it's
derivative is the next coefficient of beta in the
Taylor polynomial - Q now that also suggests that
these further or subsequent coefficients are also
going to be important and in fact they are and
we're going to give them names you might think
that they are just the higher derivatives of Q
and that's almost true but not quite there's an
important difference so we're going to have
to adopt some special notation and special
terminology to describe these higher coefficients
obtained from Q this next one we're going to call
it D sub 2 of Q and the next one D sub 3 of Q
and the next one D sub 4 of Q and so on and we're
going to call these sub derivatives of Q so this
is the derivative of Q and this is the second sub
derivative the third sub derivative the fourth sub
derivative so in terms of our notation if there's
the original Pauline umber Q then this column here
represents it's a column it's a column poly number
which is the derivative or we'll use the notation
the sub derivative putting a 1 there sort of tells
us it's a sub derivative and this next column here
represents the poly number which is the second sub
derivative of Q d sub 2 of Q the third one D sub 3
of Q that's the third sub derivative D sub 4 of Q
is the fourth sub derivative and if the polynomial
had higher degree then we could keep going there
would be more of these sub derivatives so next
time we are going to talk about the relationship
between the sub derivatives and the higher powers
of the basic derivative this is very interesting
development we are introducing calculus here in
this purely algebraic framework the derivative
is usually introduced in calculus courses by
first talking about functions and then talking
about secant's and then limits of secant's being
tangents and you have a tangent to a function at
certain point you have to compute a slope and
then those various slopes at different points
make up the derivative function it's all rather
complicated and if you do it precisely there's a
notion of limits involved and as we'll see later
on the notion of limit is in fact highly dubious
okay so the ordinary approach to derivatives
is first of all very complicated and secondly
logically weak here we see that in fact there's
a purely algebraic approach which is dramatically
simple what have we done we've started with the
poly number Q and we've evaluated Q at alpha plus
beta now we just looked at what we got and we see
that when we expand that out we see the original
Pollin umber and then the next coefficient of
beta is the derivative and then furthermore
for free so to speak we get the various higher
sub derivatives of the poly number so this is
going to have a lot of implications that we're
going to study next time so you will not be too
surprised to observe that the binomial theorem
and that Pascal array or Pascal triangle somehow
is intimately connected with this business of
translating poly numbers and finding derivatives
and higher sub derivatives so to get a sort of
sense of how that goes I propose that you give
a try of this exercise so this is actually just
some practice in going through the motions of this
video and calculating the Taylor polynomial be 2
plus alpha find the Taylor polynomials of P so the
first derivative or the first sub derivative same
thing and then the second sub derivative third sub
derivative etc and for different examples this
one P written this way and then these ones with
P written in the more original way there there
and there this one is a kind of a pure power and
if you this one here is especially instructive
because you can see very clearly I think why the
binomial coefficients are playing an intimate
connection with this subject alright so we have
an entry point now to calculus essentially a
very elementary high school entry point which
is not tangential at all it's actually very close
to the heart of the differential calculus Euler
and LaGrange would not have been surprised at
all by this point of view because they also
thought very algebraically about derivatives so
next time we're going to do some calculus with
integral poly numbers I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening